Manual groups (#116)
oscar-system/Oscar.jl: docs/src/Groups/groups.md

* `DirectProductOfGroups` = direct product of two groups
* `AutomorphismGroup` = group of automorphisms over a group

If `x` is an element of the group `G` of type `T`, then the type of `x` is `GAPGroupElement{T}`.

## Basics

### Elements of groups

Given a group `G`, it is always possible to have access to some particular elements.

> * `one(G)` = the identity element of `G`.
> ```@repl oscar
> one(symmetric_group(4))
> one(GL(2,3))
> ```
> 
> * `rand(G)`: returns a random element of the group `G`.
> 
> For very large groups, the algorithm to ensure a uniform probability could be expensive, so there exists also the function `rand_pseudo`: this is much faster than `rand`, but the elements of `G` are not necessarily equally distributed.
> 
> * `gens(G)`: returns a list of generators for the group `G`. To have access to the ``n``-th generator of the list, it is sufficient to type `G[n]` instead of `gens(G)[n]`.
> ```@repl oscar
> G = symmetric_group(4);
> gens(G)
> G[1]
> ```
> If the group `G` has been created as the subgroup of another group generated by a list of elements `L`, then the generating set returned by the function `gens` corresponds to `L`.
> 
> !!! note
>     The output of `gens(G)` is not, in general, the minimal list of generators for `G`.

Reviewer: Hmm.. I think this should be done differently: this text and the example should be part of the docstring for our methods for `one`, `rand`, gens`. Then here, we should just "include" that documentation via `@docs`

````suggestion
```@docs
one
rand
gens
```
````
Actually, that's probably not quite right yet, as `Oscar.jl` will include many `one` methods eventually, so we probably ought to tell it which one is meant here. Please carefully read https://juliadocs.github.io/Documenter.jl/stable/man/syntax/ it explains how to do this.

Perhaps also look at how some of our other packages do this; here are some select examples (you can easily find plenty more)
- https://github.com/oscar-system/GAP.jl/blob/master/docs/src/index.md 
- https://github.com/Nemocas/AbstractAlgebra.jl/blob/master/docs/src/perm.md
- https://github.com/thofma/Hecke.jl/blob/master/docs/src/number_fields/elements.md
- https://github.com/Nemocas/Nemo.jl/blob/master/docs/src/polynomial.md
Of course if you `gens` method has no good documentation comment right now, then you can take the text you wrote above and use that to form a doc comment instead.

* `inv(x)` = `x^-1` the inverse of `x`.
* `x/y` = the element `x*y^-1`.
* `x^n` = the ``n``-th power of `x`. If ``n = 0``, the identity of the group is returned; if ``n < 0 ``, the ``n``-th power of the inverse of `x` is returned.
* `isone(x)`: returns whether `x` is the identity of the group.
* `conj(x,y)` = `x^y` = the conjugate of `x` by `y`, i.e. the element `x^-1*y*x`.
* `comm(x,y)` = the commutator of `x` and `y`, i.e. the element `x^-1*y^-1*x*y`.

## Subgroups

The subgroup of a group `G` generated by the elements `x,y,...` are defined by the following instruction:

* `sub(G, [x,y,...])` ;
* `sub(x,y,...)`.

This function returns two objects: a group `H`, that is the subgroup of `G` generated by the elements `x,y,...`, and the embedding homomorphism of `H` into `G`. The object `H` has the same type of `G`, and it has no memory of the "parent" group `G`: it is an independent group.
```@repl oscar
G = symmetric_group(4);
H = sub(G,[cperm([1,2,3]),cperm([2,3,4])]);
H[1] == alternating_group(4)
```

## Permutation groups

Permutation groups can be defined as symmetric groups, alternating groups or their subgroups.
```@repl oscar
degree(symmetric_group(4))

> ```

Reviewer: I am not very fond of the `@repl` feature:
- it requires Julia to process all `@repl` examples just to be able to render the documentation, which means building the manual takes longer
- it misses an opportunity for further testing, as we never notice if Julia's output changes

Instead, please use `@jldoctest` (specifically, the REPL variant) as I suggested before; read https://juliadocs.github.io/Documenter.jl/stable/man/doctests/ for details

* `x/y` = the element `x*y^-1`.
* `x^n` = the ``n``-th power of `x`. If ``n = 0``, the identity of the group is returned; if ``n < 0 ``, the ``n``-th power of the inverse of `x` is returned.
* `isone(x)`: returns whether `x` is the identity of the group.
* `conj(x,y)` = `x^y` = the conjugate of `x` by `y`, i.e. the element `x^-1*y*x`.
* `comm(x,y)` = the commutator of `x` and `y`, i.e. the element `x^-1*y^-1*x*y`.

## Subgroups

The subgroup of a group `G` generated by the elements `x,y,...` are defined by the following instruction:

* `sub(G, [x,y,...])` ;
* `sub(x,y,...)`.

This function returns two objects: a group `H`, that is the subgroup of `G` generated by the elements `x,y,...`, and the embedding homomorphism of `H` into `G`. The object `H` has the same type of `G`, and it has no memory of the "parent" group `G`: it is an independent group.

  **Examples:**
```jldoctest
julia> G = symmetric_group(4); H = sub(G,[cperm([1,2,3]),cperm([2,3,4])]);
julia> H[1] == alternating_group(4)
true
```

## Permutation groups

Permutation groups can be defined as symmetric groups, alternating groups or their subgroups.

```@docs
symmetric_group
alternating_group
```

> Every permutation group `G` is identified by a degree, that corresponds ideally to the size of the set on which `G` is acting.

Reviewer: I don't think every permutation group is "identified" by a degree! Rather, every permutation group *in Oscar* has an associated degree.

The use of "ideally" renders this sentences rather vague. It implies that this "ideal" may not be always reached, but gives the reader no clue at all about when that is and so on. Also, is this really "ideal"? Perhaps you meant "usually"? What exactly do you want to convey here?

Perhaps more something like:
```suggestion
In Oscar, every group has a parent (see section XYZ for details). For permutation groups, the parent currently always is a symmetric group. The degree `d` of a permutation group `G` then is the degree of its parent symmetric group. That is, `G` acts on the set `1..d`.
```

Author: Isn't `parent` defined only for group elements? The symmetric group is only a kind of "sup-group" for the permutation group `G`. Maybe we should say something like:
" Every permutation group `G` has a degree `n`, that is the cardinality of the set on which `G` acts."
Then add the note about `deg(G)` != largest moved point of `G` in general.

!!! note

>     The degree of a group of permutations is not necessarily the highest moved point of the group `G`. For example, if `G` is defined as a   subgroup of `Sym(n)`, its degree is `n` even if every element of `G` fixes `n`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The degree of a permutation group is not necessarily equal to the largest moved point of the group `G`. For example, the trivial subgroup of `symmetric_group(d)` has degree `d` even tough it fixes `n`.
```

### Permutations

Permutations in Oscar are displayed as products of disjoint cycles, as in GAP. An explicit permutation can be built using the functions `perm`, `gap_perm` and `cperm`.

```@docs
perm
gap_perm
cperm
```

  **Example:**

> ```jldoctest

Reviewer: This should be inside the `perm` resp. `cperm` doc strings

julia> perm(symmetric_group(6),[2,4,6,1,3,5])
(1,2,4)(3,6,5)

julia> cperm([1,2,3],4:7)
(1,2,3)(4,5,6,7)

julia> cperm([1,2],[2,3])
(1,3,2)
```

> At the moment, the input vectors of the function `cperm` need not to be disjoint.

Reviewer: This sounds like it should be inside the docstring of cperm, not here. Also, it is a bit unclear what the significance of this statement is? Should this behavior be surprising? If so, perhaps it should explained what happens in this case? Or perhaps it all works fine?

Author: It simply means that when the function gets in input non-disjoint cycles, it multiplies them instead of returning an error, like GAP and Magma do.
I just felt to write this line just because the behaviour is different from GAP.

!!! warning

>     If the function `perm` is evaluated in a vector of integers without specifying the group `G`, then the returned value is an element of the AbstractAlgebra.jl type `Perm{Int}`. For this reason, if one wants a permutation of type `GAPGroupElem{PermGroup}`, one has to use the function `gap_perm`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If the function `perm` is evaluated in a vector of integers without specifying the group `G`, then the returned value is an element of the AbstractAlgebra.jl type `Perm{Int}`. For this reason, if one wants a permutation of type `GAPGroupElem{PermGroup}` without specifying a parent, one has to use the function `gap_perm`.
```
Of course that leaves the question why one wants to do that, resp. whether we want to recommend that... I have doubts about that.

Every permutation has always a permutation group as a parent. Two permutations coincide if, and only if, they have the same parent and they move the same points.
```jldoctest
julia> G=symmetric_group(5);
julia> x=cperm([1,2]);
julia> y=cperm(G,[1,2]);
julia> x==y
false
```
In the example above, `x` and `y` are different because `x` belongs to `Sym(2)`, while `y` belongs to `Sym(5)`.

> If `G` is a group and `x` is a permutation, it is possible to set `G` as parent of `x` simply typing `G(x)`. This returns the permutation `x` as element of `G` (or ERROR if `x` does not embed into `G`).

Reviewer: It doesn't return "ERROR", though, it "raises an error"

> ```@repl oscar

Reviewer: Please turn all of these into `jldoctest`

G=symmetric_group(5);
x=cperm([1,2,3]);
y=G(x);
parent(x)
parent(y)
```

The function `listperm` works in the opposite way with respect to `perm`: given a permutation `x`, it returns the vector `[x(1), ... , x(n)]`, where `n` is the degree of `parent(x)`. If `x` and `y` are as in the example above, we get
```@repl oscar
(x,y) = (cperm([1,2,3]), cperm(symmetric_group(5),[1,2,3])) # hide
listperm(x)
listperm(y)
```

#### Permutations as functions
A permutation can be viewed as a function on the set `{1,...,n}`, hence it can be evaluated on integers.
```jldoctest
julia> x = cperm([1,2,3,4,5]);

> julia> x(2)

Reviewer: I really don't think we should advertise that much; or if, then *first* tell people about `2^x`. Then tell them that for convenience we also allow `x(2)`, but only after a stern warning... 

Note that actually historically, a common notation for function application was `2^f`, not `f(2)` ! So while it is less well known these days, it is not the case that GAP developers are crazy when they write `2^g` to apply a permutation. 

All in all, I am still torn whether offering `x(2)` as a syntax out of the box is a good idea. It is of course trivial to implement, but once we offer it, people will start using it, and we can't remove it again. And I am concerned that it might given people the wrong idea after all... That said, if people really want this syntax, I won't veto it!

3
```
This works also if the argument is not in the range `1:n`; in such a case, the output coincides with the input.

!!! note

>     The multiplication between permutations works from the left to the right. So, if `x` and `y` are permutations and `n` is an integer, then `(x*y)(n) = (y(x(n))`, NOT `x(y(n))`.

Reviewer: Yeah, I guess I'd move this warning before the example, and also augment it by mentioning that this is why instead we recommend the notation `n^x`, as then `(n^x)^y == n^(x*y)`

And at that point we might also want to warn that in Julia `a^b^c` is evaluated as `a^(b^c)` (while in GAP it thankfully gives an error).

Author: I left the notation `x(n)` instead of `n^x` because `x(n)` is the syntax. Now I was thinking about it: do I also implement the function `^(n::Int)(x::Perm)` having the same output as `x(n)`?

## Polycyclic groups

Julia has the following functions that allow to generate polycyclic groups:
```@docs
abelian_group(::Type{T}, v::Vector{Int}) where T <: GAPGroup
cyclic_group
dihedral_group
quaternion_group
```
!!! warning

>     The type need to be specified in the input of the function `abelian_group`, otherwise a group of type `GrpAbFinGen` is returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The type need to be specified in the input of the function `abelian_group`, otherwise a group of type `GrpAbFinGen` is returned, which is not a GAP group type. In future versions of Oscar, this may change.
```

The generators of a polycyclic group are displayed as `f1`, `f2`, `f3`, etc., and every element of a polycyclic group is displayed as product of such generators.

  **Example:**
```jldoctest
julia> G=abelian_group(PcGroup, [2,4]);
julia> G[1], G[2]
(f1, f2)
julia> G[2]*G[1]
f1*f2
```

> Anyway, recall that variables named `f1`, `f2`, etc. are not initialized! To get the generators of the group `G`, one has to refer to them as `G[1]`, `G[2]`, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that this does not define Julia variables named `f1`, `f2`, etc.! To get the generators of the group `G`, use `gens(G)`; for convenience they can also be accessed as `G[1]`, `G[2]`, etc.
```
"Anyway" is colloquial. And "recall" doesn't seem to apply (from where should this be recalled?). Also note that the point about "there are no Julia variables with those names by default" also applies to free groups and in general all finitely presented groups (of which pc groups in a sense are a special case).

At the same time, access to the generators is something that really concerns *all* groups, so perhaps it would be better to move that into its own section, and then just insert a reference link here. (Please look into the Documenter.jl documentation to learn how to insert cross links to other section)

Finally, you could also mention the possibility of writing `f1, f2 = gens(G)`.

* Taking an existing function `g` satisfying the group homomorphism properties:
```julia
f = hom(G,H,g)
```
If the function `g` does not satisfy the group homomorphism properties, an error is returned.

  **Example:**
The following procedures define the same homomorphism (conjugation by `x`) in the two ways explained above.
```jldoctest
julia> S=symmetric_group(4);
julia> x=S[1];
julia> f=hom(S,S,gens(S),[S[1]^x,S[2]^x]);
julia> g=hom(S,S,y->y^x);
julia> f==g
true
```

Oscar has also the following standard homomorphism.
```@docs
id_hom
trivial_morphism
```

To evaluate the homomorphism `f` in the element `x` of `G`, it is possible to use the instruction
```julia
image(f,x)
```
or the more compact notations `f(x)` and `x^f`.

  **Example:**
```jldoctest
julia> S=symmetric_group(4);
julia> f=hom(S,S,x->x^S[1]);
julia> x=cperm(S,[1,2]);
julia> image(f,x)
(2,3)
julia> f(x)
(2,3)
julia> x^f
(2,3)
```

A sort of "inverse" of the evaluation is the following
```@docs
haspreimage(f::GAPGroupHomomorphism, x::GAPGroupElem)
```
  **Example:**
```jldoctest
julia> S=symmetric_group(4);
julia> f=hom(S,S,x->x^S[1]);
julia> x=cperm(S,[1,2]);
julia> haspreimage(f,x)
(true,(1,4))
```

!!! warning

>     Do not confuse `haspreimage` with the function `has_preimage`, which works on variable of type `GrpGenToGrpGenMor`.

Reviewer 2: Couldn't these two functions be merged? It looks indeed confusing to have both in the same system.

Author: Two functions called `haspreimage` and `has_preimage` already exist in Hecke. The first one is defined on variables of types `GrpAbFinGenMap` and `GrpAbFinGenElem`, while the second is defined on variables of type `GrpGenToGrpGenMor` and `GrpGenElem`, and they do essentially the same thing. If we want to merge these two functions, this has to be done in the Hecke package first. Then, in Oscar, we can simply import the function we decide to preserve and extend it to `GAPGroups`.

Reviewer 3: This is just an oversight/inconsistency in Hecke. We should not replicate this here :)

We just need to decide for one convention and follow it through. There is no need to change it in Hecke first.

* `DirectProductOfGroups` = direct product of two groups
* `AutomorphismGroup` = group of automorphisms over a group

## Subgroups

The subgroup of a group `G` generated by the elements `x,y,...` are defined by the following instruction:

* `sub(G, [x,y,...])` ;
* `sub(x,y,...)`.

> This function returns two objects: a group `H`, that is the subgroup of `G` generated by the elements `x,y,...`, and the embedding homomorphism of `H` into `G`. The object `H` has the same type of `G`, and it has no memory of the "parent" group `G`: it is an independent group.

Reviewer: It has no memory of a parent? Does that make sense? Why is it called `sub` then, and not e.g. `group`?

Reviewer 3: Because it returns the embedding.

Author: I was thinking to create also a function called simply `group`, that works in a similar way to the GAP function `Group`.

Reviewer: @thofma I was only referring to the second variant (sorry, I failed to state that), which only takes a bunch of elements, not an existing group

@GDeFranceschi sounds good, that could replace the second `sub` variant

Reviewer 3: Yes, but even for the second variant it returns the new group `H` together with the embedding into `G`. Without the embedding, I would not call it `subgroup`, but just `group`.
